# immunerepertoire-analysis-ALEM

<b>Alemtuzumab-induced immune phenotype and repertoire changes: implications for secondary autoimmunity</b> <br>
Authors: Tobias Ruck#, Sumanta Barman#, Andreas Schulte-Mecklenbeck#, Steffen Pfeuffer#, Falk Steffen, Christopher Nelke, Christina B Schroeter, Alice Willison, Michael Heming, Thomas Müntefering, Nico Melzer, Julia Krämer, Maren Lindner, Marianne Riepenhausen, Catharina C Gross, Luisa Klotz, Stefan Bittner, Paolo A Muraro, Tilman Schneider-Hohendorf, Nicholas Schwab, Gerd Meyer zu Hörste, Norbert Goebels, Sven G Meuth, Heinz Wiendl. #equally contributing first authors <br>
Journal: Brain <br>
Year: 2022


<b>Abstract</b>

Alemtuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that causes rapid depletion of CD52-expressing immune cells. It has proven to be highly efficacious in active relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis; however, the high risk of secondary autoimmune disorders has greatly complicated its use. Thus, deeper insight into the pathophysiology of secondary autoimmunity and potential biomarkers is urgently needed. The most critical time points in the decision-making process for alemtuzumab therapy are before or at Month 12, where the ability to identify secondary autoimmunity risk would be instrumental. Therefore, we investigated components of blood and CSF of up to 106 multiple sclerosis patients before and after alemtuzumab treatment focusing on those critical time points.

Consistent with previous reports, deep flow cytometric immune-cell profiling (n = 30) demonstrated major effects on adaptive rather than innate immunity, which favoured regulatory immune cell subsets within the repopulation. The longitudinally studied CSF compartment (n = 18) mainly mirrored the immunological effects observed in the periphery. Alemtuzumab-induced changes including increased numbers of naïve CD4+ T cells and B cells as well as a clonal renewal of CD4+ T- and B-cell repertoires were partly reminiscent of haematopoietic stem cell transplantation; in contrast, thymopoiesis was reduced and clonal renewal of T-cell repertoires after alemtuzumab was incomplete. Stratification for secondary autoimmunity did not show clear immununological cellular or proteomic traits or signatures associated with secondary autoimmunity. However, a restricted T-cell repertoire with hyperexpanded T-cell clones at baseline, which persisted and demonstrated further expansion at Month 12 by homeostatic proliferation, identified patients developing secondary autoimmune disorders (n = 7 without secondary autoimmunity versus n = 5 with secondary autoimmunity). Those processes were followed by an expansion of memory B-cell clones irrespective of persistence, which we detected shortly after the diagnosis of secondary autoimmune disease.

In conclusion, our data demonstrate that (i) peripheral immunological alterations following alemtuzumab are mirrored by longitudinal changes in the CSF; (ii) incomplete T-cell repertoire renewal and reduced thymopoiesis contribute to a proautoimmune state after alemtuzumab; (iii) proteomics and surface immunological phenotyping do not identify patients at risk for secondary autoimmune disorders; (iv) homeostatic proliferation with disparate dynamics of clonal T- and B-cell expansions are associated with secondary autoimmunity; and (v) hyperexpanded T-cell clones at baseline and Month 12 may be used as a biomarker for the risk of alemtuzumab-induced autoimmunity.
